Our simulator is coming together
nicely, but constantly writing
out all the data to disk for
visualization can be overkill.
Instead, we can track
something simpler, like
per row total temperature.
This way we can easily see how
much heat accumulates at the
boundaries over time without having
to dump every cell's temperature.
To visualize this idea, imagine
that we take each row of our
2D grid, add up the temperatures
of every cell in the row.
And store the sum in a 1D vector.
In this example, the first
row has 3 cells at 5 degrees
each, so we store 15 as the
first element of the vector.
The second row has 3 cells at
3 degrees each, so we store
9 in the second element, and so on.
The question is, how do we
implement this row-wise aggregation
in a clean and efficient way?
A straightforward approach is to
reach for thrust tabulate again.
But this time we tabulate over row
indices instead of cell indices.
Inside the lambda, we loop
through each column in the
row, accumulate the total
temperature, and return that sum.
But is this the best way to do it?
Let's think about the potential
performance implications.
When we write our code this
way, it's important to keep
in mind that the GPU doesn't
automatically We parallelize
the loop inside our lambda.
Thrust only parallelizes at the
level of rows because we're calling
thrust tabulate on row indices.
If you have millions of columns,
but only a handful of rows,
you end up with just a few threads
doing massive work on each one.
That means you're leaving
most of the GPU's parallel
potential on the table, effectively
using less than 1% of its capacity.
So how do we fix this?
We need to somehow distribute
the work across many threads.
In other words, we want
each column in a row to
be handled in parallel too.
We'll begin by naming the
operation we're trying to perform.
If we ignore the fact that we have
a row dimension, it basically looks
like a standard reduction, except
we're grouping values by row.
That's exactly where a thrust
reduced by key comes in.
Unlike a plain reduce,
reduced by key takes two
input ranges, keys and values.
It then groups together values
that show the same key and
reduces each group independently.
So in our case, the row index
naturally becomes our key.
All the cells in a given row
share the same key, and we
can sum those cell values together.
In this way, we spread the
work across many threads
while still ending up with
one final sum per row.
To use reduceByKey, we need
each cell in the grid to
know its row key.
We'll create a rows ID array
where each entry corresponds
to the row index for the cell
at position I. In the code snippet,
we do that by calling thrust
tabulate on our row IDs vector,
passing a lambda that returns
I divided by the grid width.
That way, every cell in row
zero gets a key of zero, every
cell in row one gets a key
of one, and so on.
Once we have our row IDs array,
we can call thrust reduced by key.
We pass row IDs begin and row
IDs end as input keys, where
each entry corresponds to the row.
We pass temp begin for
the input values.
These are the temperatures
in our 2D grid flattened
into one dimension.
We pass thrust make discard
iterator as the output keys,
which we'll discuss in a moment.
And finally, we pass SUMS BEGIN
As the output values where the
final per row sums will be written.
This way all cells with the
same row key get added together
and we end up with one sum
per row in the sums vector.
By default, reduced by key
writes both keys and values
into output iterators.
But in our case, we already
know each row corresponds
to a unique key in order.
So writing out those row IDs
would be redundant.
To save memory bandwidth,
we use thrust make discard
iterator for the key output.
A discard iterator simply
ignores any values written
to it, so we skip storing
the integer sequence and keep
only the per row sums in sums.
These changes translate into
roughly 100-fold speedup compared
to our initial approach, which
relied on tabulate with a
loop in the lambda.
It's a striking reminder
that GPUs don't magically
parallelize your code.
You need to design your data
processing so all those GPU
threads can share the workload.
Whenever you see a loop
inside a device Lambda,
ask yourself if there's
a more parallel way to do it.
We've eliminated most sources
of inefficiency, but there's
still one more issue.
Right now, our algorithm makes
two passes through memory,
one for the temperature values
and another for the row indices.
We don't actually need to store
those row IDs in memory at all.
Think about how we generated
the row indices by transforming
cell indices, 0, 1, 2, and
so on into row IDs, i over width.
Instead of storing that result
in the row IDs array, we can
use fancy iterators.
A counting iterator for the
cells, plus a transform iterator
that converts each cell index
into a row index on the fly.
That way, we never write the
row IDs out to memory.
Your first exercise is to replace
the explicit row IDs vector with
these iterators so we have only one
real set of data reads and writes.
The second exercise is
optional and includes
the transform output iterator.
So far, we've been transforming
values as we read them
from the iterator.
But you can also transform
values as you write them by
adding another level of indirection
on the output side.
In the example, we return
a tiny wrapper object from
the iterator's subscript operator.
When we assign a value to
that wrapper, its assignment
operator applies a transformation.
In our case, it divides the
incoming value by 2 before
storing it in the underlying array.
This leads to an
interesting behavior.
So if you assign it at index
0 a value of 10, 10 is divided
by 2 and the array element
actually ends up storing 5.
In many ways, a transform
output iterator is symmetrical
to the transform iterator we've
already used, except this time
the transformation happens when
writing instead of Good reading.
So, instead of taking raw data and
returning modified values, it takes
the values you assign and writes a
transformed version back to memory.
This transform output iterator
idea is really handy in our
row temperature scenario.
Right now, each row sum can be
a very large number, which isn't
always meaningful in practice.
We're more interested in the
average temperature per row.
Of course, we could do another
pass to divide those sums
by the row width, but that
would mean extra reads and
writes, which we'd prefer to avoid.
Instead we can use a transform
output iterator to convert
the totals into means on the
fly as we write them out.
So in this optional exercise,
replace the final output iterator
in the reduce by key call
with a transform output iterator
that divides each row sum
by the grid width.